---
layout: post
title: What I learned from being QIP PC chair
categories: QIP, conferences
---

I was recently chair of the program committee for [QIP 2018](https://qutech.nl/qip2018/), and since I started the process by writing past chairs for advice, I thought I'd write down my own thoughts with the hope that they might be useful later.  I was inspired in part by [Boaz Barak's reflections on being PC chair](https://windowsontheory.org/2015/03/02/tips-for-future-focsstoc-program-chairs/) which contains some great ideas like "shell reviews" as well as a helpful overview of the whole process.

**Before the talk submission deadline**

One piece of advice from Boaz that I can't repeat enough is to start everything early, including getting invited early to be PC chair.  The early stages of the process involve inviting the PC, some back and forth with SC (steering committee) and local organizers about dates and policies, writing a call for papers (CFP), and distributing it widely. If you want to make any significant changes to last year's CFP then you'll need the SC's feedback/approval.  And if the changes are big enough that they'll affect whether someone is willing to be on the PC, then you'll also want these changes to be settled before you send out invitations to the PC.  This early stage isn't a lot of work but it does involve a lot of chasing busy people, writing emails in ways where it's clear how to reply, and generally staying on top of things. In your invitation to the PC, you'll want to set not only the "external" dates (like paper/poster submission/notification deadlines) but also various internal deadlines, such as when paper bids are due.  Even internal deadlines need to specify the time of day and timezone, in part to communicate how important the deadlines are (if one person hasn't done their paper bids, then no one can start reviewing).

_Software._ One thing to think about during this period is conference management software.  The usual one for our community is [easychair](https://easychair.org/). Others like [HotCRP](https://hotcrp.com/) might be better because of their greater flexibility (e.g. you could make tags like "q info theory papers needing discussion" to coordinate discussion) but then the PC will be less familiar with it.  If you do easychair, you'll probably want to get the local organizers to pay for at least the "professional" license, but even this doesn't get you any support from easychair.org.  It's worth spending a little while playing around with the software in this early stage especially if you have been a PC member often but not a PC chair.  Also, the software can change.  For example, many of us were surprised that easychair dropped the step where PC members could approve subreviews before they went live.

Another software choice which would be worth figuring out is one to schedule parallel sesssions.  Chris Schaffner pointed out to me that the Chaos Computer Congress has [software](https://github.com/tomster/halfnarp) for this purpose ([described here](https://events.ccc.de/2014/11/25/lets-do-the-halfnarp/)).  In my case, I didn't think of this until we had basically decided on the list of accepted talks, and it was too late for a process that involved waiting for people's feedback, so I just made the tracks manually.  The feedback I got about the parallel sessions was mostly positive but if you remember any problems with it, please email me or post it here.

*PC selection.* You'll want diversity in region, seniority, demographics, and especially topic.  Choosing the right topic balance is tricky. In my case, I expected more submissions in delegation/verification/validation and fewer in thermodynamics/resource theories/optics, among other mistakes.  It is worth studying past PCs and asking their chairs about how the topic balance worked for them.  Speaking of past PCs, you probably want a few people who have access to the reviews from the past few QIPs but otherwise it's best to bring in people who haven't been on the QIP PC very recently.

*Co-chair and COI policy.*  Normally PC members can submit papers themselves, and historically this hasn't been a problem.  The QIP charter allows even the PC chair to submit papers, and you'll have to decide on a process for this, or decide not to submit anything.  My process was to choose a co-chair (Ronald de Wolf) who handled my submissions, and to be careful only to look at the list of papers when logged in as "track chair" and not "super-chair" (these are options when for multitrack conferences on easychair).  I think this went fine (all my papers were rejected :)) but you could make arguments either way here.

Another question is how to handle same-institution CoI.  I used an easychair plugin that automatically marked papers as CoI if the authors were at the same institution, but this was imperfect in a few ways.  On a technical level, the system often had out-of-date information about institution.  But also, at some large institutions, you might almost never see someone who is technically your colleague there.  On the other hand, when you see everyone's CoIs, you realize that people make a lot of mistakes.  I don't have a great answer to this, other than generally trusting the judgment and integrity of the PC members.

*Policy questions.*
Of course everyone's favorite question is the 3-page abstract.  I think they should be dropped and that this will save authors time without much negative impact on reviewers, who have always been allowed to skim.  Others disagree for reasons including: reducing submissions where authors don't make an effort, helping people write their submissions in a way that they are likely to be accepted (especially those who don't regularly get papers into QIP), and helping PC members who weren't initially assigned to a paper.  (Perhaps one should also survey authors.) For QIP 2018, I (with the permission of the SC) officially dropped the need for an extended abstract. To compromise with some members of the PC who liked the 3-page abstracts, the CFP  ([see here for wording](https://qutech.nl/qip2018/qip-2018-call-for-submissions/)) still treats the first three pages of any longer submission somewhat like the old extended abstracts, making the change ultimately fairly mild.  In my opinion, we should tell authors to communicate their ideas as clearly and efficiently as possible, without explicit page limits.  But future PC chairs should at least think about the submission format issues early and discuss with a range of people.  Before writing this post, I surveyed the QIP 2018 PC and there was still a range of opinion (4 liked the requirement and 4 didn't).  So I imagine that the QIP 2019 PC will be talking about this too!

Another new policy in QIP 2018 was to allow anonymous submissions.  This raises various practical issues, such as figuring out who has a COI.  However, in practice there were zero anonymous submissions.  It may be that many papers are anyway on the arxiv, or that the issues of bias are that some names *help* a paper rather than that some names *hurt* a paper.  This [post](https://lemire.me/blog/2018/05/24/gender-and-peer-review) claims that in one study, double-blind reviewing didn't improve the fate of papers by female authors.  I've seen elsewhere evidence in favor of double-blind reviewing (I can't remember where) but it does seem like there is not much buy-in from the QIP community.

*Subreview policy.* It's worth being explicit in advance about the role of subreviewers.  Subreviewers let the PC members save time,  can take advantage of expertise that's not on the PC, and can sometimes read the long version of submissions in greater detail.  However, they might be biased to favor their own subfield/friends and they may have trouble calibrating the scores on their review because they aren't comparing to other papers from this year and/or they don't have enough QIP experience to know what the typical acceptance thresholds are.

With hindsight, I think the right policy is to not have subreviewers enter scores.  Easychair doesn't exactly have this functionality but I realized partway through the process that I could allow blank scores, and could encourage subreviewers to use this.

The reason I think this is a good idea is that it forces the PC member to come up with a score.  I had asked PC members to use subreviewers to help them understand a paper but to still come to their own opinion of the paper which they would be able to defend in discussion.  This sometimes happened but often didn't.   A big part of what I did during the discussion period was to prod PC members to respond to questions, clarify reviews and generally engage in discussion.  This seemed to be most necessary when a long detailed subreview had a score that was far from the scores of other reviewers, and the PC member seemed to not personally have endorsed that score.

*Bids*.
I had 36 PC members and 296 talk submissions.  I asked each PC member for 50 yes+maybe bids.  With hindsight I would've asked for more.  50 was enough in most cases, but sometimes half the PC bids for the same paper, and other papers get only 1-2 bids total.

**During the discussion period**

*Moderating debate.*
My main job during the discussion phase was to prod PC members to reply to each other's points and generally to keep the debate moving.  I'd also summarize the state of the discussion ("looks like most people are in favor of this paper, but reviewer A has some concerns which I see the others haven't addressed, and which look serious.  B,C, what do you think?") and sometimes invite in more reviewers.  Here I tried to keep my own opinions fairly mild, and even if I suspected that I disagreed with people's points, I would instead invite in more PC members.

However, I also assigned myself some papers (about half as many as the typical PC member) and reviewed them like the rest of the PC.  This meant in one case, strongly disagreeing with another PC member's opinion even after several rounds of back-and-forth discussion.  So far, so good, since questions of significance, potential utility, and surprise are all fairly subjective. The problem is that this meant I couldn't also be a moderator in that discussion, in a case where _someone_ needed to moderate.  In this case, I asked Ronald to moderate the discussion. However, with hindsight, I should have asked Ronald to moderate *all* the papers that I assigned myself to review, to prevent me from ever having to play both roles.

Most of the papers I reviewed were considered clearly below the bar.  I think this is because people mostly bid on the papers they thought they would like, and I ended up taking many of the papers that didn't have enough bids.  So this mostly wasn't an issue, but using the co-chair in this way is something I'd recommend future PC chairs do.

*Timing.*
One area I definitely screwed up was the period 1-2 weeks into the discussion phase, when I didn't push the PC quickly enough to focus on borderline papers.  I was happy with the quality of the discussion in the end, but the final weeks felt more rushed than they should've been. Ronald suggested I move 5 papers to 'accept?' and 20 papers to 'reject?' each day, always with the option of moving them back to undecided if someone protests.  I didn't do this, but should have.

More generally, some PC members will use discussion phase to actively look around for things that seem wrong, and others will wait until prodded.  As a PC member, I was one of the active ones, and I mostly felt like I interacted with active PC members, but as chair, you see the entire range.  One way of prodding someone is an easychair comment (although these emails might sometimes get filtered), but another way is to start marking papers as provisionally accepted/rejected.

**Some stats**

Here, for posterity, are some of the stats that were presented at the business meeting.  The headline number is the 20.6% acceptance rate: 61 accepted out of 296 submissions.  After 4 merges, this meant 57 talks. There were 256 posters accepted and not withdrawn, starting from 133 poster-only submissions, 168 from talk-or-poster submission, minus one only rejected poster.

*Timing*
* Within last minute of deadline: 	1
* Within last hour of deadline:		15
* Within last day of deadline:		125
* After deadline:			3
* More than one week early: 32

*PC output*  
There were 3.15 reviews/submission, meaning about 26 reviews per PC member (half that for me and Ronald).  Of these, 10.4 on average were subreviews.  In total, the PC wrote 285526 words of review + 91530 words of PC-only discussion, which comes to about 10000 words/reviewer, or 1250 words/submission.


**Questions for the future**

The process brought up several issues that could use more discussion and perhaps a clear decision from the SC/community would be useful.

*Timeliness and resubmissions*  
The CFP says contributions should be "outstanding recent research contributions" but what exactly does "recent" mean?  Can someone resubmit a paper rejected from QIP X to QIP X+1?  My view (and the standard I pushed in QIP 2018) is that we shouldn't have a hard cutoff but once something is more than a year old then most people in its target audience already know about it.  I don't think we should be strict because sometimes papers get overlooked and we also don't want to discourage early arXiv submissions or rewriting.  I also think resubmissions are also ok, given the inherent noise in this process, but there should enough overlap between PCs that people can see last year's arguments against any given paper.  Regardless of the policy here, it should be spelled out a bit more in the CFP.

*Experimental work*  
QIP has historically been a (mostly) theory conference but as experimental progress in QC advances, should QIP start accepting more experimental talks?  Or should we just have 1-2 invited experimental talks?

My guidance to the PC in 2018 was to say that we don't have a strict rule but that the audience is a theorist audience, so we should evaluate experimental talks in terms of what would interest this audience.  This will automatically rule out reports on the latest increases in qubit number and fidelity, but might include things like a new architecture, or experimental work that raises or settles new theory questions.

While I think this approach makes sense and allows some flexibility without opening the floodgates, there are reasons to prefer a more clearly defined approach.  Some PC members would appreciate it to help them evaluate submissions.  Also, it is arguably unfair to experimentalists interested in submitting to QIP if most of them mistakenly think that the conference is closed to them, or if they waste their time formatting their submissions for a conference that doesn't evaluate their work.

Similar issues arise for other work whose relevance to QIP is uncertain.  Some PC members wanted more guidance here although I think that the field is still too dynamic for clear rules to be possible.

*QIP discussions and later reviewing.*  
Some of us have pushed for open reviewing and the buy-in has been only partial, since reviewers already do a lot of work but feel that a public review would need to be written to a higher standard (among other reasons).  Still, the reviews are valuable resources.  One way to use them is to informally connect editors for journals to either QIP reviewers or at least members of the PC who would have access to the QIP reviews.  This gets around the one-shot nature of conference reviewing by introducing some continuity.  One drawbacks is the risk of introducing correlated errors, or more generally, amplifying some opinions that were developed perhaps hastily.  In any case, this will not happen often, since only PC members even know about which papers were rejected from QIP.  I mention it in case the community has any feedback on this.

**More thoughts from the PC**  
In writing this post, I polled the PC for their thoughts on the process.  In no particular order, here are some of the things they said (not all relevant to the PC process).  My comments are in italics.
* Bring back the rump session!  *I agree!  Although it was getting long and evenings were getting full.  People are always allowed to skip things.*
* Cheaper conference dinner. _It may not be easy to "just order pizza and get some kegs" for 500 people but I also would vote for something more informal, perhaps where you can walk around and talk to different people._
* Wow there are a lot of clearly subpar submissions.  Maybe we should restrict submissions somehow? _I don't think excessive submissions are a problem but a few different PC members brought it up.  Perhaps there could be mechanisms to reduce the # of independent reviews for submissions that are clearly belong threshold?_
* Some PC members wanted more clarity on some of the above issues, like our approach to experimental work, older submissions, and submissions that were seen as deviating from the guidelines.  Others _(like me)_ were happy with flexibility.
* Along with a low acceptance rate, there is a concern about "outsiders" having trouble meeting the ever-evolving QIP standards.  This one of the arguments given for requiring 3-page abstracts + full papers, which do generally tend to guide submissions towards a format more likely to be accepted.  _I agree with this but think that there is also scope for putting more "non-binding" advice in the CFP, which can help authors without forcing either authors or referees to be too rigid._
